Falling Off.

	Climbing is all about getting up. The trick is to ascend
vertically to the top with appropriate downward glances to check
the placement of the feet on foot holds, but without downward
movement of the rapid uncontrolled variety. Deviation from ascent
is permissible by traversing sideways, climbing down or
abseiling, but certainly not by taking to the air and relying on
gravity.

	The reasons for this are, of course, obvious. Firstly
climbers are land creatures who do not possess wings so any
attempts at aerobatics will inevatibly result in a bumpy landing.
Secondly the whole ethos of the sport of climbing is to get up.
To fall off is to repudiate this.

	Nevertheless the art of falling off is sometimes practised
by those who find themselves too stretched to continue upwards.
As with all good climbing clubs, the Castle is rife with stories
by those who have fallen off, ranging from the ones who have got
away with amazing scrapes and near misses to those who have
suffered more serious injuries. At various times battered helmets
and frayed ropes have been displayed in the Clubroom, while the
fallen themselves have limped in on crutches their damaged limbs
suitably encased in plaster.

	The better practitioners of the art of falling off manage to
ensure by the prior placement of adequate runners and a good
choice of second, the avoidance of contact with rocks on the face
or the ground at the bottom. so that the fall is no more than a
mere dangle from the last runner. The less able practitioners of
the art fail to keep one or more of these points in mind and so
fail to achieve such innocuous results.

	Some go quietly, others with much noise and commotion.
Witness the club member who destroyed the Lakeland solitude on
Dow Crag by noisily dislocating his shoulder, the din of his
painful fall being equalled only by his protests at the rough and
ready on©the©spot reduction of the injury by a fellow Club
member.

	Some are not even content with a single incident but insist
on trying again. For example one notorious case who insisted on
returning to the crags with his newly acquired pot only to chalk
up another fall to his portfolio and more Plaster of Paris to his
person.

	At this stage I have to declare my personal interest in the
matter and admit to belonging to the ranks of the fallen. My fall
was accomplished without noise or loud proclamation and I did
achieve dangle © only in my case the dangle was merely momentary
due to the runner not proving sufficient. It all began innocently
enough one sunny May afternoon. First my left hand slipped off
the rock followed by my right hand and then by both legs. The
books tell us that three points of contact is the rule. And with
no point of contact at all further upwards progress becomes
impossible. The result was the forbidden condition of downward
flight. As I saw terra firma approaching at alarming speed with a
painful impact seeming inevitable and unavoidable, my reaction
changed from mild surprise at my sudden airborne status to abject
terror. Contrary to folklore, my previous life did not flash
before me and events did not happen in slow motion. On the
contrary, the ground approached at great speed and the result was
quick and painful. My landing was possibly the most unskilful of
all following very much the traditional warning of the result of
a bad landing given to raw recruits in the Paras, "toes, knees,
hospital!"

	Well, there it is, my personal summary of the whys and
wherefores of falling off and how it worked for me. It is an
activity which continues from year to year and one activity which
is inseparable from climbing itself. Without the risk of falling
off there would be no being gripped, no adrenaline and no beer
embellished accounts of scrapes and near misses. Most of the
fallen do resume their climbing careers, some as I have already
mentioned even repeat the experience. Personally, though, I have
succumbed completely to the downward urge and now practice the
art of caving.

Mike Doyle.
