Skye 28th. May © 6th. June 1982.

	The old saying about not drinking and not driving does not
apply with Mike Anderson the saying should do not drive, full
stop. It was a beautiful journey though passing through Loch
Lomond just beforedaybreak and Ben Lomond, etc. were beautifully
situated against the sky. We passed through Glencoe at daybreak
passing a herd of deer and a beautifully outlined Buchaille
before driving down to Glencoe village itself. To our
disappointment we found that the ferry did not start until 8am
but a lovely if meagre breakfast at the local hotel put us into
good spirit for the journey to Glen Brittle which arrived at 11
o'clock.

	After a hurried dinner we decided that we would tackle Sgurr
Alasdair (3257ft). In my own overated opinion the approach would
only take half an hour but the odd but the odd ? summit and the
larger than expected plateau added to my calculation
considerably. Then it was a most enjoyable if not steep scramble
to the ledge just below the Cioch. I then proceeded to climb an
overated Difficult ? scared me beyond belief because of the
exposure. My hands and knees at least managed to calm my nerves
to some extent. We arrived at the Cioch in time to witness Mark
and Mike's epic attempt. When they had arrived back and had ? ?.
We continued to ceawl back along the 
