Western Gully, Black Ladders.

"This is going to be a straight forward climb with no epics
or benightments. I've done the route before, it's grade IV and we
are going to make a really early start, so there is no chance of
getting benighted." Knowing grins were exchanged by the others.

The route in question was Western Gully in North Wales. The
climb is on a crag called The Black Ladders in the heart of the
Carneddau. Next morning I kept my resolution about making an
early start and we were away from the hut by 5.00 am. Also, I had
a very strong partner in the form of the Caveman so success and
descent before the pubs closed seemed assured. We drove round to
Bethesda and began the long walk up Cwm Llafar.

The first setback happened when we arrived at the bottom of
the gully at about 7.00am to find everyone else had also got up
early. I suppose the route's inclusion in "Cold Climbs" accounts
for its popularity as people add it to their tick lists. Two
parties were already established on the first pitch with numerous
others waiting their turn at the bottom and we could hear sounds
of others above. Andy and I geared up surreptitiously to one side
of the crowd and when we were ready played our trump card.
Cheating outrageously Andy lead up the steep frozen turf to the
left of the first ice pitch. The crowd fell silent and stared at
us amazed that we should manage to outflank them by this simple
subterfuge. Andy reached the first stance having successfully
overtaken two parties and I climbed up quickly to reach him. We
were now near the front of the queue and moving together in the
easier section that followed we overtook all but one pair.

Catching up with the two at the front of the queue just
below a steep section, I belayed and brought Andy up to me. The
others had managed to get their ropes into a bit of a tangle so
we had to wait while they sorted things out. Looking up at the
continuation of the gully there was hardly any build up of ice
with only a veneer of verglace and dusting of powder snow
covering the rocks. Eventually the way was clear and Andy set off
up the next pitch. This was a narrow chimney with awkward moves
to exit at its top. Climbing in his usual fast and efficient
style he had soon reached the next stance. When it was my turn to
follow I found the ground anything but straight forward and
struggled on the moves to leave the chimney.

The team in front of us were now at grips with the famous
chockstone pitch. The leader had inserted a peg upside down in
the roof and was busily knocking all the ice off the steep wall
which is the key to avoiding the chock. Eventually he overcame
the chock but took even longer to get up the remainder of the
pitch while we stood in the icy cold of the cave under the chock.
His second struggled on the first section out of the cave,
demolishing the remaining ice and disappearing into the chimney
above. Eventually it was my turn. I climbed easily up to the peg
but several attempts to climb the wall to one side of the
chockstone were repulsed by the lack of the ice and resulted in
clattering descents to the floor of the cave. Eventually I
managed to fix a wire in a crack in the roof formed by the chock
and using this for aid I reached over and jammed my axes in the
crack over the chockstone and heaved myself up round it. I was
now in a very precarious position in a narrow chimney but a few
feet above the chimney widened out and after a few rapid moves I
was able to wedge myself in a secure position. It was only then
that I noticed a peg below my feet just above the chockstone and
which I had failed to see in my previous haste. There was no
prospect of other runners nearby so I reversed the previous
delicate moves and reached down managing to clip the peg at full
stretch. Regaining my wedged position I contemplated the ground
above. The narrow chimney continued with just a glaze of ice on
the walls, enough to make normal rock climbing impossible but not
enough to allow for the use of Chacals and crampons. I did not
fancy tackling any of this without some more runners but the only
obvious crack was too small to take my one channel peg.
Communicating my sentiments to Andy he asked the two women who
had just arrived in the cave if we could borrow one of their
pegs. While the peg was being sent up to me I could hear Andy was
holding a conversation with the two women; 
"Do you know Dai Lampard then?"
"Yes quite well, he's my husband."

Their smallest peg proved to be too big and eventually I tied a
sling off around a thin icicle convincing myself that it would
hold my weight if I fell. However, there was now another problem.
The chimney was too constricting to climb with a sack but further
contortions enabled me to remove it and hang it from the icicle.
Struggling to climb above the sack, the ice shattered and all
four points of contact parted company at once. I began to 
slither down the chimney, the icicle thread broke as my weight
came onto it and I was heading down over the chockstone onto the
boulders underneath. Luckily I managed to hook the crab clipped
to the peg above the chock with my Chacal. This arrested my fall
but I was now tangled up in the ropes and the sack.  After
tussling for a few minutes with the tangle of gear while hanging
on with one arm I managed to get sorted out and was once again
wedged in the chimney. A further session of digging out likely
looking cracks resulted in a hex hammered into a crack at the
back of the chimney. Once again I hung the sack off this and set
off up the chimney. This time I was more careful with the ice and
reached a better thread round an icicle about twenty feet above.
Above this the difficulties eased slightly, the ice got thicker
and I was able to rest. At the top of the chimney there was an
awkward move out onto a slab but a hairline crack provided a good
placement for a knife©blade. There was one final small bulge and
I was in a second cave with massive spike belays to which I
thankfully lashed myself.

Looking back down the gully I could see all the other parties had
given up and were abseiling as I took in the rope and started to
bring Andy up. He climbed whilst I alternately taking in one rope
with the sacks attached and then the other rope with Andy on. 

"You had better get your head torch out," he said as he arrived,
"It'll be dark soon" and looking at my watch I saw it was nearly
four o'clock! We had been on the route for eight hours although
it seemed far less.

The next pitch was quite short up a slab onto easier ground
above. In normal conditions the slab is covered in ice but today
it was just dusted with powder snow. Andy balanced up to a peg,
crampons scraping on the rock and then mantleshelved onto the
peg. A few more delicate moves above this and the climbing was
straightforward ground. When my turn came to follow I was
impressed with this lead and I found the climbing very insecure.

By this time I was completely knackered so Andy offered to lead
on. The next pitch was straightforward with only one awkward
boulder to surmount. Above this the climbing became easier and we
moved together up the upper section to the top. As I emerged onto
the summit Andy walked forward and shook my hand.

It was a starlit night with perfect visibility. "There should be
no problem getting off. All we do is to follow the cwm round
keeping it on our left and then go down the easy slope to the
bottom of the crag," I said. We set off keeping close to the edge
so as not to lose the way. After some time I was convinced that
we had reached the point at which we should descend into the Cwm.
However, I had nagging doubts, there were lights in the valley
below where there had no right to be any and the steep descent
that I remembered was an easy angled slope. We kept on going
eventually reaching the bottom but it did not look anything like
Cwm Llafar. After walking down the Cwm for some time Andy shouted
that he had found a tarmaced track. Suddenly I knew where we
where, we had descended into the Ogwen valley and those lights in
front of us were in fact the hut!

Soon we reached the hut and walked in to hoots of derision. This
was the second week in a row that I had got benighted and walked
off the wrong side of the hill!

Ian Barton.


