
Route Major.

The Summer of 1986 was a good one in the Alps with a long
period of settled weather early in the season. I was camping at
Pierre d'Orthaz opposite to the infamous Snell's Field. Unlike
Snell's, Pierre d'Orthaz has the advantage of being legal and
thus one's gear is not likely to be transported to the
Gendarmerie whilst away climbing a Route.

I had been in Chamonix for a few weeks so had already
climbed several routes and was quite fit and well acclimatised. I
have always wanted to climb a Route on the Brenva Face of Mont
Blanc, the meteo was predicting at least two days of good weather
so this seemed like a good time to try. The Brenva Face is one of
the largest and most impressive in the Alps. Situated on the
Italian side of Mont Blanc, framed between the Brenva Ridge and
Eckpfeiler Buttress, it is 1.5 km long and the face itself is
5000' high. Since it faces directly into the morning sun an early
start is essential to get above the seracs which dominate the
lower part of face and to escape the avalanches which sweep this
part of the face during the day.

The face was originally explored by T. Graham Brown with
various partners in the 1930's. During this period he climbed the
three routes for which the face is famous; Route Major,
Sentinelle Rouge and The Pear. All three routes are impressive
tackling the biggest face on the mountain and leading directly to
the summit. There are no great technical difficulties but all the
routes are exceptionally long, at high altitude and there is
considerable objective danger from avalanches. I particularly
wanted to climb Route Major which takes the great snow©ice
buttress defining the left hand side of the Great Couloir in the
centre of the Brenva face.

I had arranged to do the climb with Gareth, a Scot, who had
climbed the Brenva Ridge a couple of weeks earlier with some
other friends of mine. They had in fact been planning to climb
Route Major but after getting lost trying to find the hut had
failed to traverse far enough across the bottom of the face (a
common mistake) and had ended up on the Brenva Ridge. Near the
top of the Route one of the party who was not acclimatised had
got into difficulties and it had taken them a very long time to
climb the final slopes leading to the summit of Mont Blanc. Just
below the summit they had also come across two other Brits  who
had climbed the Cecchinel Nomine route on the Eckpfeiler
buttress. One of them was in a bad way, had collapsed from
exhaustion in the snow and had to be helicoptered off but that is
another story.

We decided that the best way to tackle the climb was to
travel light and climb quickly, moving together, to minimise our
exposure to objective dangers. We took only one 9 mm rope two
rock pegs and two ice screws but we had plenty of food most of
which we ate at the hut before starting the climb. I took no
spare clothes and the only item in my rucksack during the climb
was a cagoule. The climb would be a three day trip from Chamonix,
an afternoon to reach the hut climbing the face that night while
it was frozen into immobility followed by a bivouac in the Vallot
hut just below the summit of Mont Blanc. The next day we would
descend the ordinary route to Chamonix.

Just to gain access to the Brenva Face from Chamonix was
quite an expedition in itself. The first stage was to take a
telepherique to the summit of the Aig. du Midi (easy on the legs
but hard on the wallet) and descend into the Vallee Blanche and
traverse it to one of the two huts (the Ghiglione and the
Fourche) that give access to the face. Finding the huts was a
problem in itself, both are situated on a ridge which overlooks
the Brenva Face but are very difficult to locate from below. I
had been to both previously but I never knew which hut I was
going to end up at until I had actually arrived there. Following
some tracks on the glacier we climbed up a steep icy gully to the
crest of the ridge and finally arrived on the balcony of the
Fourche Hut about six in the evening.

The hut itself was very small sleeping only 8©10 people but
the view was outstanding. Leaving this hut was particularly
exciting, an abseil from the balcony onto the glacier below being
necessary. It was definitely not a place for sleepwalkers.
Standing on the hut balcony the whole of the Brenva Face was
clearly visible. The route from the hut crossed the upper part of
the Brenva Glacier, climbs over Col Moore and then traverses the
bottom of the face until below the large rock tower, the
Sentinelle Rouge. Climbing up slopes of snow and ice to the
Sentinelle Rouge the route then traverses the Great Couloir to
reach the foot of the great rock©ice buttress which forms the
substance of the route. All this section is very exposed to
avalanches and must be completed at night. The buttress provides
the most difficult climbing but is safe from objective danger and
leads to the summit ridge between Mont Blanc de Courmayeur and
Mont Blanc. 

The hut was full of Italians who were intending to climb the
Brenva Ridge with a guide and also two other Brits who were
planning to climb the Frontier Ridge on Mont Maudit. We managed
to squeeze into a corner near to the door next to a couple of
inscrutable Japanese, got our food out and began to cook. This
annoyed the Italians who complained that the stove made too much
noise and was keeping them awake. Ignoring the protests we
carried on cooking and stuffed ourselves with spaghetti and baked
beans. Just after we had finished and the Italians had returned
to their slumbers, a couple of Scottish lads arrived and began to
cook their food further rousing the Italians' ire. We had a brief
conversation with the two Japanese and discovered that they also
planned to climb Route Major the next morning.

It was impossible to rest in the crowded hut so we abandoned
our plan of staying in the hut until 2.00 am and left at 11.00 pm
instead. Someone had kindly left a rope hanging from the balcony
of the hut but it was only after abseiling to the end of it that
I discovered that it stopped 30 metres short of the glacier.
Gareth was not impressed but luckily it was too dark to see what
the consequences of a slip would have meant. Some quite tricky
climbing down steep ice and chossy snow lead down to a final leap
over the bergschrund onto the glacier.

Roping up we started to plod across the glacier towards Col
Moore. A nearly full moon illuminated our progress in the icy
cold of the night and we congratulated ourselves on our good
luck. However, a few minutes later, as if to spite us, the moon
disappeared behind the summit of the Blanc and everything went
dark. Switching on our head torches we carried on over the Col
and began to traverse below the face across the avalanche prone
gullies. Huge blocks of ice littered the glacier, evidence of the
avalanches that fell here during the day. At this point Gareth's
head torch went out and we had to stop and take it to bits (not
easy with freezing hands in the dark) but could find nothing
wrong. We re-assembled it and as if by magic it started to work
again. Looking back towards the hut we could see the two head
torches of the Japanese as they began their descent onto the
glacier. 

Gareth was determined not to repeat his previous mistake and
so we went what seemed like miles across the bottom of the face
until we could see what appeared to be the Red Tower above us.
Crossing the bergschrund to get established on the face proved
tricky as the upper lip was covered in unconsolidated icing
sugar. Burying my axes up to the arm pits I mantelshelved and did
a belly flop onto the slope.

Shortly above the bergschrund the icing sugar changed to
hard ice and we were funnelled into a wide gully. Rounding a
corner we saw some small seracs above but got over these by
climbing a small ice ramp which split them. Above the gully
became wider and an indeterminate distance above we could see
what we assumed to be the Sentinelle Rouge. The climbing was
quite tiring because of the hard and polished surface of the ice.
Small chips of ice slithered down the slope towards us and
looking down we could see the vast piles of avalanche debris at
the bottom of the face.

After climbing some distance up the slope it became obvious
that the rocks above us which we had thought, in our ignorance,
to be sheltering us from possible avalanches were in fact big
seracs and highly dangerous. The little slivers of falling ice
now assumed a greater significance as we anticipated the really
big one which would sweep us from the slope. We were now clearly
lost but had no alternative but to continue and soon we reached
the seracs. Luckily we found an easy line climbing them by one
long but quite steep pitch.

We thought that we might be out of danger now but our
illusion was shattered as above us we could see a third even
larger row of seracs. Climbing over some smaller stuff we arrived
at the base of the main barrier. It was my lead and I was
distinctly worried as I began to work my way up the steep ice.
The climbing was very steep and the ice hard and dinner plating.
I had no way of knowing if I would be able to reach less steep
ground and a belay. Fortunately I reached the top of the serac
with about 20' of spare rope. Seconding this pith was just as
nerve racking for Gareth as the belay was a single ice screw and
so the rope offered only an illusion of security.

Once on top of the serac we could see a rocky ridge up to
our left and decided to make for this thinking that we would be
safe on its crest. The slope seemed to go on for ever as acutely
conscious of the need for speed we climbed towards the rocks.
Eventually we reached the foot of the buttress and found an easy
gully leading to the crest. Safe at last we paused for a good
look around. Suddenly everything clicked into place as I could
see the Brenva Ridge far below us. We had climbed the couloir and
seracs to the right of Route Major and were now above all the
difficulties and out of danger.

Far below us we could see the head torches belonging to the
parties beginning their ascent of the Brenva Ridge. It was two
o'clock in the morning and we had managed to climb 4000' of
difficult ground: far from being slow as we had thought we had
been climbing extremely fast!

Gareth was very annoyed at having got lost on the Route
twice in succession and we sat down to discuss what to do next. I
was equally annoyed about getting lost but more relieved that we
now knew where we were and were finally off the face. It was
still quite a way to the summit up a long and tedious snow slope
which we both knew was hard going at this altitude. Disillusioned
with not having found the correct line, one alternative was to
descend the Brenva Ridge back to the hut enabling us to return to
the fleshpots of Chamonix that afternoon. This route would be
sheltered from avalanches if the sun hit face before we had
descended. We started down and lost height rapidly. Close to the
bottom of the ridge I suggested descending a gully on one flank
down to the glacier to save time instead of going all the way to
the end of the ridge. When we reached the foot of the gully we
discovered that we could not get over the bergschrund and were
forced to traverse along the base of the Brenva Ridge to a point
where the bergschrund narrowed. This lead us directly beneath the
seracs over the Gussfeldt Couloir! Jumping the bergschrund we ran
down the slope below and out of the fall line to safety.

Plodding back across the glacier we were treated to a
magnificent sun rise over Mont Maudit and to complete our
catalogue of errors we ended up at the Ghiglione hut. Shortly
after arriving at the hut there was a tremendous noise and
rushing outside we saw a massive avalanche from the Pear seracs
sweeping the route we had been climbing. We retired to bed
suitably chastened for a well deserved sleep.

Later on in the day as we left the hut to go back down to
Chamonix I had a good look at the Brenva Face and saw that while
we had been sleeping there had been another avalanche from the
seracs above the Gussfeldt Couloir under which we had traversed
on our descent.

The walk back up the Vallee Blanche was extremely tiring and
we only just caught the last telepherique down to Chamonix. When
we got back to Pierre d'Orthaz the lads told us that two people
had been killed on Route Major the previous night and they
thought it must have been us! Luckily we had got back before they
had sold our gear.

The next day we wandered into the Guides Bureau and looked
at the definitive Routes book. It seemed no one had climbed our
line before so it seemed that we had done a new route by mistake,
although I doubt if anyone will wish to repeat it. We asked about
the two people who had been killed. The Guide said that two
Japanese had been killed near the great buttress by an avalanche
at about the time we should have been there if we had left the
hut at the planned time.

Ian Barton.
