:SETUP:
#+SETUPFILE: ./setup.org
#+TITLE: Boat Trip to the Western Highlands.
:END:

* Boat Trip to the Western Highlands
by
Mike Jackson

It was July 1983, time at last for our long planned visit to
the "Rough Bounds" of Knoydart, especially significant for Jim
Thomson since he was to complete his Munro trail in this remote
and beautiful area. My old friend Bob Madeley, armed with a
yacht master's certificate, had chartered a boat at Loch Carron,
a little twenty nine foot beauty named "Jackie", providing the
ideal approach to this wonderful district of long narrow sea
lochs and dramatically wild hills. The party from Sheffield
included a friend David and my son John and we stayed overnight
in Edinburgh with Jim and his wife Jean, much appreciating their
warm welcome and kind hospitality.

On the Saturday we drove up to Lochcarron village and cast
off from the old ferry slip way at North Strome at 5.00 pm on a
bright and sunny afternoon. The calm waters of Loch Carron
glistened in the sunshine and we enjoyed an evening of dark blue
sea, clear blue sky and exquisite beauty with a magnificent
panorama across the sea of the sharp serrated skyline of the
Cuillin of Skye. The trip was enlivened by many sightings of
seals, eiders and guillemots and after negotiating the narrows at
the Kyle of Lochalsh we moored at 8.00 pm in Loch na Beiste south
of Kyleakin, a backwater of idyllic peace and tranquillity with
herons and gulls calling and curious grey seals around the boat.

We set off for Loch Hourn at 5.00 am in order to pass
through the narrows of Kyle Rhea on the tide, our main objective
of the day being to climb Ladhar Bheinn, the grand hill
overlooking Barrisdale Bay. After passing the Sandaig Islands
with a view behind of the Skye Cuillin, the boat turned towards
Loch Hourn and we looked inland to great misty hills with magical
light effects on the peaceful waters. Three cormorants adorned
the buoy at the entrance to the loch, arctic terns flew by
regularly and later a golden eagle soared effortlessly over
Barrisdale. We anchored on a beautiful morning in sheltered Poll
a'Mhuineil two miles west of Barrisdale. Bob and John stayed on
the boat but David, Jim and I walked along the shore above the
blue waters and met our friend David Howgate who had walked in
from Kinloch Hourn the night before to camp by the outflow of the
Coire Dhorrcail stream. This was a lovely campsite at which to
linger, with foxgloves in flower by the stream and with a
splendid view over the loch to Beinn Sgritheall, but the clegs
were out in force and encouraged us to set off up the hill.

The walk up the ridge east of the coire, deeply incised in
its lower reaches, was enjoyed with frequent pauses to savour the
exquisite views of Loch Hourn. We traversed steep grassy slopes
to join the fine stalkers track which comes up from Barrisdale.
We could now see right down to the loch and over to Beinn
Sgritheall whose high summits were just visible above a great
bank of white cloud, the scene framed by silver birches. As the
track led into the coire to join the lovely stream with its
cascades and pools, our sight of the sea was lost but the crags
and gullies at the head of the coire became visible with patches
of beautiful white mist hanging about them. As usual in high
summer, innumerable orchids and bog asphodels were growing in the
lush green grasses. We headed for the steep grassy slopes to the
right of a great rocky promontory, with fine views of the
impressive ring of high crags supporting the indented ridge
overlooking the coire. Higher up the steep slopes we came across
clumps of pink thrift and numerous white flowers of the starry
saxifrage.

We arrived gratefully at the narrow col on the ridge and
turned up the next section, steep in places and with a charming
thrift garden adorning the way above the cliffs of the coire.
Then on to the narrow East Summit of the mountain with a view to
the south which was grassy, green and wild rather than beautiful
and with a glimpse of Luinne Bheinn beyond the dramatic end of
the ridge we had climbed. From the cairn we could see down into
wild and rough Coire Odhar but the walk along the delightful and
airy summit ridge past the Ordnance Survey cairn to the west end
of the hill brought us into a wet mist and the wind became very
chilly. We hurried back to the East Summit and turned down the
ultra narrow and steep sided ridge on the north side to a minor
col and then up to Stob a' Choire Odhair, a further delightful
section of the walk, albeit still in the mist.

After coming some way down the north east ridge we suddenly
emerged from the mist with a fantastic panorama of Barrisdale Bay
and the narrow upper reaches of Loch Hourn. Across the great
depths of Coire Dhorrcail, the steep buttress of Stob
a'Chearcaill protruded grandly and impressively from the mist.
This was indeed a wonderful viewpoint and whilst picking our way
down the ridge over a number of steep and awkward sections we had
entrancing vistas at every step. David H. headed back to
Barrisdale and the rest of us left the ridge to return to the
boat down steep and broken slopes of long grasses mixed with
rocky outcrops   a real taste of the "Rough Bounds"! We later
picked up David at his campsite before sailing through the
narrows and eventually anchoring near Skiary at the head of Loch
Hourn, a most dramatic and exciting location at which to spend
the night, the loch hemmed in by steep hillsides towering above
the boat.

The next morning was peaceful and quiet but with grey mist
on the slopes above the loch. After being ferried ashore we
followed the delightful lochside track to Kinloch Hourn, a
wonderful place having a unique atmosphere of serenity and quiet
beauty, with wavelets lapping quietly against the edging of brown
and orange seaweeds, the calls of sandpiper and common gull, and
the arctic terns hovering and then plunging into the placid
waters. The mist cleared from the summit of Sgurr a'Mhaoraich
from which we had enjoyed fantastic views down to the head of the
loch some years before. We then returned to the boat for the next
stage of our journey to Loch Nevis and our remaining Knoydart
Munros.

During the sail back down the loch, Ladhar Bheinn massively
overlooked our position, a magnificent combination of great coire
cliffs and steep supporting ridges. At Barrisdale, a pair of red
throated divers took off and wheeled around the boat. We later
enjoyed a magical sail through the Sound of Sleat with numerous
shearwaters trailing their wings just above the waves, family
groups of guillemots on all sides and a solitary gannet plunging
into the sea. The weather steadily improved as we came into
Inverie Bay with Sgurr Coire Choinnichean towering steeply above
the settlement and a long view to remote Sgurr na Ciche at its
sharpest, a delight of blue sky and sea with white clouds above
green hills and the sun gloriously warm and bright. After a brief
halt we sailed on through the narrows of Kylesknoydart and
eventually moored the boat by Eilean Maol offshore from Camusrory
at the head of the loch. This was a glorious evening with a
magnificent view from the boat up to the acute and shapely
pyramid of Sgurr na Ciche and the rocky heights of Ben Aden,
right in the heart of Knoydart. The weather seemed set fair for
our next day when we hoped to enjoy with Jim the last two Munros
he had still to climb.

The following morning was misty and grey, and as the dinghy
ferried us to the shore at Camusrory a heavy drizzle set in. We
walked on to the ruins of Carnoch where the nearby river
 notoriously difficult to cross hereabouts  was so low that it
 could have been forded easily at a number of places  in any
event, there is now a footbridge near Carnoch and those purists
who object to it can still avoid it if they so prefer. The Mam
Meadail track rises in a series of well constructed zig zags,
much appreciated by most but which caused Jim to express
reservations as to how much additional distance was incurred by
following them! The drizzle soon stopped and although Sgurr na
Ciche remained in the clouds there was a clear view back down to
the colourful saltings of the River Carnach, the yellows, oranges
and browns contrasting beautifully with the green grass and grey
rocks of the surrounding hills. The air was filled with the
fragrance of the bracken and bog myrtle and as we were all
wearing shorts the long wet grasses merely freshened our legs.

 Once at the bealach we could see right down Glen Meadail to
Inverie Bay and over to the distant and hazy Skye Cuillin. A
steep climb up broken slopes brought us to the south east ridge
of Meall Buidhe which led directly to the South East Top. By now
the clouds had cleared from the summits to give magnificent views
over this great wild area, in particular towards the Sgurr na
Ciche to Sgurr Mor ridge which I had traversed with Jim, John and
Andy Smith the previous year. There were also grand views across
to Luinne Bheinn beyond great expanses of ice scoured grey rock
in Coire Odhair and over to Ladhar Bheinn with its attendant
green ridges. We had a delightfully easy stroll to the main
summit and back before descending the steep north east ridge
which near its top has an area with remarkable split blocks of
striated rocks around great fissures. The ridge was awkward in
places with rocky outcrops but we pressed on down to the Bealach
Ile Coire and over an intervening rise to a lower col, where we
looked back to our wild descent ridge with its black lochans
nestling on either side. We had our first glimpse of Lochan nam
Breac which we were to visit later in the day.

Jim headed across the coire towards a broad shelf leading to
the west side of Luinne Bheinn whilst the two Davids and I
traversed steep broken slopes up to the high col on the summit
ridge before continuing to the far west cairn. This was a superb
walking ridge with wonderful bird's eye views down to the green
and grey waters of Barrisdale Bay, backed by Beinn Sgritheall. As
an added bonus we could now see clearly as far as the distant
peaks of Torridon, The Saddle and Sgurr na Sgine, the Five
Sisters of Kintail and the great ridges of Cluanie and Affric. We
met up with Jim and walked together back to the main summit and
then over to the East Top on which Jim at last completed his
Munro trail on the very day of his seventy third birthday
"Mission accomplished!" We celebrated in the traditional style on
this wild and remote hill and I reflected on the many wonderful
Munro days shared with Jim over the years, at all seasons, in all
weathers and always with the greatest possible companionship and
enjoyment.

The descent to the high pass of the Mam Unndalain was
slabby, knobbly and awkward but gave grandstand views of Lochan
nam Breac in its wild and narrow glen, backed by Sgurr Mor and
the waters of Loch Quoich and massively overlooked by craggy Ben
Aden. It was already four o'clock and time to say farewell to
David H. who was returning via Barrisdale to his car at Kinloch
Hourn after enjoying three memorable days with us on the boat and
in the hills. He descended the track to the west while the rest
of us followed the beautifully contoured track to the east over
vast hillsides and down to Lochan nam Breac. Jim and I marched
along the undulating track with glimpses of the dark and still
waters below until we reached the far end of the loch with its
exquisite sandy beach. We both enjoyed a bathe here with a fine
backdrop of Luinne Bheinn framed by the steep hillsides above the
loch: one of my own long cherished ambitions fulfilled and
especially relished after our bathes together in the high lochs
of Coire Lagan and Coire'a'Ghrunnda on Skye the previous year.

This would have been a beautiful spot at which to linger,
but the time was now six o'clock and we were a long way from our
boat on Loch Nevis. After we had picked our way through a wild
and trackless river gorge with giant boulders, steep rocky bluffs
and lovely trees, a welcome path gradually emerged and we crossed
over the River Carnach to follow its right bank. There was a
superb campsite where the river bends sharply to the south, with
sandy reaches overlooked by large buttresses  it was a surprise
to come across campers here, apparently so far from civilization.
We had already traversed two rocky hills and then diverted to
Lochan nam Breac and we now faced a seemingly never ending yet
beautiful walk on the riverside track back to Carnoch and
Camusrory on a peaceful but grey evening. This had proved a great
day, notwithstanding the midges which attacked us brutally whilst
we waited for the dinghy. Our big day out on the hill had lasted
for over twelve hours and the evening at Loch Nevis was calm and
beautiful as we relaxed over a fine meal during which the
inevitable feelings of achievement and contentment set in.

Having accomplished our principal objectives in fine style,
our next delight was a visit to the magical Isle of Rhum. As we
escaped through the narrows into outer Loch Nevis, large flocks
of eider rested on the sea and flights of shearwaters trailed the
waves above numerous parties of guillemots. After resting at Loch
Scresort on Rhum where a number of red throated divers idled
around the boat, we spent the evening on an idyllic cruise along
the north coast of the island, watching a wonderful variety of
sea birds on the cliffs and groups of red deer browsing
peacefully on the bright green grassy slopes above the shore. The
views to Skye were breath taking with the high serrated peaks of
the Cuillin emerging above great banks of white cloud beyond the
limpid waters on a perfect warm sunny evening. The sunset was
magnificent and it was still light well after midnight
the red throated divers were wailing as we settled down for the night.

Jim, David and I set off the next morning for a traverse of
the Rhum Cuillin from misty Barkeval to Sgurr nan Gillean. The
mist cleared away as we reached the summit of Allival to give a
dramatic sighting of Askival and a clear view down to our tiny
boat on blue Loch Scresort  thereafter the cloud cleared from
each summit just as we arrived at the highest point, with
wonderful effects of mountain and mist. The sun became very hot
indeed on the traverse of the great rocky height of Askival and
on the steep ascents from Bealach an Oir to Trallval and from
Bealach an Fhuarain to Ainshval, the former a superb narrow and
rocky double summit, the latter giving a beautiful grassy walk to
Sgurr nan Gillean. After descending to remote Dibidil we set off
on the long trek back to the boat on a delightful track high
above the deep blue sea with incredible views of nearby Eigg and
then of the Skye Cuillin and our Knoydart Munros.  John rowed us
back to the "Jackie", closely pursued by clouds of biting midges,
after another twelve hour day of magnificent hill scenery in
marvellous conditions.

The boat sailed from delectable Rhum early next morning on
an idyllic day of flat seas and glorious sunshine, with great
rafts of shearwaters and guillemots resting on the water. We had
exquisite views back to our Rhum peaks adorned by streamers of
white clouds and across to  the mainland hills, all free of mist
under a clear blue sky. We continued on through the narrows at
Kyle and back into Loch Carron where a pair of great northern
divers flew past.

This was a perfect evening on which to complete an wonderful
trip. We had achieved all we had planned and more and the weather
conditions had enabled us to enjoy the experience to the full.
The combination of the "Jackie" and the wild hills of Knoydart
and Rhum had proved an inspiration as rewarding as any, a meet
none of us could never forget.
