:SETUP:
#+SETUPFILE: ./setup.org
#+TITLE: Route Major.
:END:

* Route Major
by
Ian Barton

The summer of 1986 was a good one in the Alps with a long
period of settled weather early in the season. I was camping at
Pierre d'Orthaz opposite the infamous Snell's Field. Unlike
Snell's, Pierre d'Orthaz has the advantage of being "legal" and
thus one's gear is not likely to be transported to the
Gendarmerie whilst one is away climbing a Route.

I had been in Chamonix for a few weeks so had already
climbed several Routes and was quite fit and well acclimatised. I
had always wanted to climb a Route on the Brenva Face of Mont
Blanc and the meteo was predicting at least two days of good
weather, so this seemed like a good time to try. The Brenva Face
is one of the largest and most impressive in the Alps. Situated
on the Italian side of Mont Blanc, framed between the Brenva
Ridge and Eckpfeiler Buttress, it over a mile long and the Face
itself is 5000 feet high. Since it faces directly into the
morning sun, an early start is essential to get above the seracs
which dominate the lower part of the Face and to escape the
avalanches which sweep this part of the Face during the day.

The Face was originally explored by T. Graham Brown with
various partners in the 1930's. During this period he climbed the
three Routes for which the Face is famous:  Route Major ,
 Sentinelle Rouge  and  The Pear . All three routes are impressive,
tackling the biggest face on the mountain and leading directly to
the summit. There are no great technical difficulties but all the
routes are exceptionally long, are at high altitude and there is
considerable objective danger from avalanches. I particularly
wanted to climb  Route Major  which takes the great snow ice
buttress defining the left hand side of the Great Couloir in the
centre of the Face.

I had arranged to tackle the climb with Gareth, a Scot, who
had climbed the  Brenva Ridge  a couple of weeks earlier with some
mutual friends. They had in fact been planning to climb  Route
Major  but after first getting lost trying to find the hut and
then failing to traverse far enough across the bottom of the Face
 a common mistake  they had ended up on the  Brenva Ridge . Near
the top of the Route one of the party who was not acclimatised
had then got into difficulties and it had taken them a very long
time to climb the final slopes leading to the summit of Mont
Blanc. Just below the summit they had also come across two other
Brits  who had climbed the  Cecchinel Nomine  route on the
Eckpfeiler Buttress. One of them was in a bad way, had collapsed
from exhaustion in the snow, and had to be helicoptered off   but
that is another story.

We decided that the best way to tackle the Route was to
travel light and climb quickly, moving together, in order to
minimise our exposure to objective dangers. We took only one nine
millimetre rope, two rock pegs and two ice screws but we had
plenty of food, most of which we ate at the hut before starting
the climb. I had no spare clothes and the only item in my
rucksack during the climb was a cagoule. The Route would be a
three day trip from Chamonix: an afternoon to reach the hut and
an overnight ascent  climbing the Face while it was frozen into
immobility , followed by a bivouac in the Vallot hut just below
the summit of Mont Blanc. The next day we would descend via the
ordinary route to Chamonix.

Just to gain access to the Brenva Face from Chamonix is
quite an expedition in itself. The first stage is to take a
telepherique to the summit of the Aiguille du Midi  easy on the
legs but hard on the wallet  and to descend into the Vallee
Blanche which is traversed to one of two huts, the Ghiglione or
the Fourche. Finding the huts is a problem in itself, since both
are situated on a ridge overlooking the Brenva Face and are very
difficult to locate from below. I had been to both previously but
I never knew which hut I was going to end up at until I actually
arrived there. Following tracks on the glacier, we climbed up a
steep icy gully to the crest of the ridge and finally arrived on
the balcony of the hut about six in the evening  it was the
Fourche.

The hut itself is very small, sleeping only eight to ten
people, but the view is outstanding since from the balcony the
whole of the Brenva Face is clearly visible. Leaving the hut
would be particularly exciting, an abseil from the balcony onto
the glacier below being necessary. It is definitely not a place
for sleepwalkers. From the hut our line of approach would cross
the upper part of the Brenva Glacier, climb over Col Moore and
then traverse the bottom of the face until below the large rock
tower, the  Sentinelle Rouge . Climbing up slopes of snow and ice
to the Sentinelle Rouge we would then traverse the Great Couloir
to reach the foot of the great rock ice buttress which forms the
substance of the route. All this section is very exposed to
avalanches and consequently must be completed at night. The
buttress provides the most difficult climbing but is safe from
objective danger and leads to the summit ridge between Mont Blanc
de Courmayeur and Mont Blanc.

The hut was full of Italians who were intending to climb the
 Brenva Ridge  with a guide and also two other Brits who were
planning to climb the  Frontier Ridge  on Mont Maudit. We managed
to squeeze into a corner near to the door next to a couple of
inscrutable Japanese and began to cook our food. This annoyed the
Italians who complained that the stove made too much noise and
was keeping them awake. Ignoring the protests, we carried on
cooking and filled ourselves with spaghetti and baked beans. Just
after we had finished and the Italians had returned to their
slumbers, a couple of Scots lads arrived and began to cook their
food, once again arousing the Italians' ire. We had a brief
conversation with the two Japanese and discovered that they also
planned to climb  Route Major  the next morning.

It proved impossible to rest in the crowded hut, so we
abandoned our plan of staying there until 2.00 am and left at
11.00 pm instead. Someone had kindly left a rope hanging from the
balcony of the hut but it was only after abseiling to the end of
it that we discovered that it stopped thirty metres short of the
glacier. Gareth was not impressed, but luckily it was too dark to
visualise the consequences of a slip. Some quite tricky climbing
down steep ice and chossy snow lead down to a final leap over the
bergschrund onto the glacier.

Roping up, we started to plod across the glacier towards Col
Moore. A nearly full moon illuminated our progress in the icy
cold of the night and we congratulated ourselves on our good
fortune. However, a few minutes later, and as if to spite us, the
moon disappeared behind the summit of the Blanc and everything
suddenly went dark. Switching on our head torches we carried on
over the Col and began to traverse below the Face across the
avalanche prone gullies. Huge blocks of ice littered the glacier,
evidence of the avalanches that fall here during the day. At this
point Gareth's head torch went out and we had to stop and take it
to bits  not easy with freezing hands and in the dark  but could
find nothing wrong. We re assembled it and as if by magic it
started to work again. Looking back towards the hut we could see
the two head torches of the Japanese as they began their descent
onto the glacier.

Gareth was determined not to repeat his previous mistake and
we continued for what seemed like miles across the bottom of the
Face until, above us, we could see what appeared to be the  Red
Tower . Crossing the bergschrund in order to get established on
the Face proved tricky, as the upper lip was covered in
unconsolidated icing sugar. Burying my axes in the snow up to my
armpits I managed to mantleshelf and did a belly flop onto the
slope above.

Shortly beyond the bergschrund the icing sugar changed to
hard ice and we were funnelled into a wide gully. Rounding a
corner we found ourselves below some small seracs, but avoided
these by climbing a small ice ramp which split them. The gully
then became wider and we could see at an indeterminate distance
higher up what we assumed to be the  Sentinelle Rouge . The
climbing was quite tiring because of the hard and polished
surface of the ice. Small chips of ice slithered down the slope
towards us and below we could see vast piles of avalanche debris
at the bottom of the Face.

After climbing some distance up the slope it became obvious
that what we had thought, in our ignorance, to be rocks
sheltering us from possible avalanches were in fact more seracs,
this time much bigger and highly dangerous. The little slivers of
falling ice now assumed a greater significance as we anticipated
the really big fall which would sweep us from the slope. We were
now clearly lost but had no alternative but to continue and we
soon reached the seracs. Luckily we found an easy line, climbing
them by one long but quite steep pitch.

 Thinking that the danger was now past, our illusion was
shattered as above us we could see yet a third and even larger
row of seracs. After climbing over some smaller formations we
arrived at the base of the main barrier. It was my lead and I was
distinctly worried as I began to work my way up the steep ice.
The climbing was very steep and the ice hard and dinner plating.
I had no way of knowing if I would be able to reach less steep
ground and a belay. Fortunately, I reached the top of the serac
with about twenty feet of spare rope. Seconding this pitch was
just as nerve racking for Gareth as the belay was a single ice
screw and so the rope offered only an illusion of security.

Once we had surmounted the last serac we could see a rocky
ridge up to our left and decided to make for this, thinking that
we would be safe on its crest. The slope seemed to go on for ever
as, acutely conscious of the need for speed, we climbed towards
the rocks. Eventually we reached the foot of the ridge and found
an easy gully leading to its crest. Safe at last, we paused for a
good look around. Suddenly everything clicked into place as I
could see the  Brenva Ridge  far below us. We had climbed the
couloir and seracs to the right of  Route Major  and were now above
all the difficulties and out of danger.

	Far below us we could see the head torches belonging to the
parties beginning their ascent of the  Brenva Ridge . It was two
o'clock in the morning and we had managed to climb 4000 feet of
difficult ground: far from being slow as we had thought, we had
in fact been climbing extremely fast!

Gareth was very annoyed at having missed his chosen Route
twice in succession and we sat down to discuss what to do next. I
was equally annoyed about having got lost, but was even more
relieved that we were finally off the Face. However, it was still
quite a way to the summit up a long and tedious snow slope which
we both knew would be hard going at this altitude. Disillusioned
at having failed to find the correct line, we had the alternative
of descending the  Brenva Ridge  back to the hut, enabling us to
return to the fleshpots of Chamonix that afternoon. This route
would at least be sheltered from avalanches if the sun hit the
Face before we had completed the descent.

The decision to go down was duly made and we lost height
rapidly. Close to the bottom of the ridge I suggested descending
a gully on one flank to save time instead of going all the way to
the end of the ridge. However, at the foot of the gully we could
not discover any way over the bergschrund and we were forced to
traverse along the base of the  Brenva Ridge  to a point where the
bergschrund narrowed. This lead us directly beneath the seracs
overlooking the Gussfeldt Couloir! After jumping the bergschrund,
we ran down the slope below and out of the fall line to safety.

Plodding back across the glacier we were treated to a
magnificent sunrise over Mont Maudit but to complete our
catalogue of errors we managed to end up at the Ghiglione hut.
Shortly after our arrival there was a tremendous noise and on
rushing outside we saw a massive avalanche from  The Pear  seracs
sweeping the route we had been climbing. We retired to bed,
suitably chastened, for a well earned sleep. Later in the day, as
we left the hut to go back down to Chamonix, I had a good look at
the Brenva Face and saw that whilst we had been sleeping there
had been another avalanche, this time from the seracs above the
Gussfeldt Couloir below which we had traversed on our descent.

The walk back up the Vallee Blanche proved extremely tiring
and we only just caught the last telepherique down to Chamonix.
When we got back to Pierre d'Orthaz the lads told us that two
people had been killed on  Route Major  the previous night and they
had thought it must have been us. Luckily we had got back before
they had sold our gear!

The next day we wandered into the Guides Bureau and looked
at the Definitive Routes Book. It seemed that no one had
previously climbed our line so it would appear that we had done a
new route by mistake, although I doubt if anyone will wish to
repeat it. We asked about the two people who had been killed. A
Guide told us that two Japanese had been overwhelmed near the
great Buttress by an avalanche. This had happened at just about
the time we should have been climbing the Buttress had we left
the hut when we had originally planned.
